@def rss_pubdate = Date(2021, 2, 14)
@def rss = """10 years ago today, we published 'Why we Created Julia' ..."""
@def published = "14 February 2021"
@def title = "Why We Use Julia, 10 Years Later"
@def authors = """The Julia Community"""
@def mintoclevel=2 
@def maxtoclevel=3

# Foreword

Exactly 10 years ago today, on this very blog, we published ["Why We Created Julia"](https://julialang.org/blog/2012/02/why-we-created-julia/), introducing the Julia project to the world. At this point, we are well on our way to meeting the ambitious goals set out in the original blog post. From vaccines to climate modeling, material science, macroeconomics, and many leading edge scientific collaborations, the Julia community today is at the forefront of human discovery. Lines of code in a git repository give an open source project form, but a community gives it life. We continue to be impressed every day by the breadth of knowledge and kindness of spirit of the many members our community. Because of that, we wanted to give this space to them. Below we collate the stories of some of the members of the Julia community (both old and new) in a shared reflection on the past 10 years.

\toc


## Keno Fischer

Ten years ago, when "Why we created Julia" was published, I was just finishing my senior year of high school as an exchange student at a tiny school on the Eastern Shore of Maryland. With some painful memories of attempting school projects and online courses in Octave, college acceptance in hand and not much else to do, I resonated strongly with the need for better tools in computational science and started working on Julia that very day. 10 years, there has been hardly a day in the past decade that I did not work on Julia. In this time I've worked on everything from astronomy, over homomorphic encryption, to simulating semiconductors and much in between. There have been many memorable events along the way. For example, 5 years ago, in a first for a dynamic language, we pushed Julia over the Petaflop barrier (a feat that is much easier now ;) ) running more than a million simultaneous threads of Julia on one of the worlds' largest computers. Every year, I look forward to JuliaCon to get together with the friends I've made along the way and admire how far we've come from the tiny group of people hacking away in a conference room at MIT. It's been a wild 10 years, and things are only getting more exciting.

## Avik Sengupta

My first reaction on seeing the headline on Hacker News that day was a decidedly lukewarm "oh, do we really need yet another programming language". Reading the blog post however piqued my interest -- "it surely can't deliver on all that it promises, can it?". It was a slow day at work, so I downloaded the source, and was surprised to see that it built successfully on the first try. My [first PR](https://github.com/JuliaLang/julia/pull/471) came two weeks later. It added a new numerical type, and proved to me that easy and performant numerical computing was certainly possible. In the years since, I've been privileged to be part of this amazing community, as well as being able to write Julia in my day job. Julia has certainly changed my life, and I reckon it's already changed the world in a small way. 

## Chris Rackauckas

I came rather late to the scene, around 2016. I had written GUIs in R, libraries in Python and MATLAB, handled MEX files and wrote my MPI using C. I wrote some ODE solvers using Fortran like a good ol' kid. I did my due diligence. It was an absolute mess, especially being a Windows user, and so when I found Julia I was astonished to find something that would actually work. No more SciPy installation error from some compiler missing on Windows: Julia was the compiler. And more and more, Julia is the compiler. It was wild when everything was new. In those early days of v0.5-beta I remember creating the Plots.jl and the Juno IDE documentation as trades for getting bug fixes. And from all of that experience in the "wild west", my experience with language and computation had changed. Before, I was thinking language was fixed and it's the differential equation solvers ([DifferentialEquations.jl](https://diffeq.sciml.ai/stable/)) that were "my" work, but with Julia everything opened up. Is the implementation of generating random Poisson numbers fast enough, or for this use case is there something faster than hits the statistical tolerance that I needed? Well that code is in Julia, so let's take a look. Having everything in one language soon meant the world expanded to thinking about how every floating point operation could be optimized for the application at hand. Everything that was taken for granted was now in the hands of the domain. That was how differential equation solving expanded into scientific machine learning and the [SciML Open Source Software Organization](https://sciml.ai/)). Now we [have SciML benchmarks](https://github.com/SciML/SciMLBenchmarks.jl) along the whole stack, top to bottom, incorporating everything from [physics-informed neural network solvers of partial differential equations](https://neuralpde.sciml.ai/dev/) to recursive array data structures. There are so many places in math that are simply untouched because they sound like the domain of a compilers instead of "computational science", and I'm excited to see how the next 10 years bridges this gap in Julia.

## Elliot Saba

I originally read about the release of Julia v0.1 on slashdot, and immediately attempted to get it to build on my MacBook.  I was a fresh graduate student and scarred by working in MATLAB.  While I had discovered numpy and was making good use of it in my research and coursework, my soul longed for something better.  When running `make` resulted in a linker error, I googled around a bit and made a [two-character pull request](https://github.com/JuliaLang/julia/pull/717) to fix it.  Little did I know that the next ten years would take me on a journey through learning about compilers, writing our first "CI system" as a for loop in `bash`, building a [global content delivery network](https://pkg.julialang.org/), rebuilding a [neural network toolkit](https://github.com/FluxML/NNlib.jl/pull/94), designing a [cross-compiler build environment](https://binarybuilder.org/) to satisfy all of our non-Julia needs, and much, much more.  While I was originally attracted to the Julia world due to the technology, the welcoming nature of the community, and the lack of ego made me feel right at home.  As we like to say, "Come for the speed, stay for the community".  It's been a long journey with many good friends, and I can't wait for the next in-person JuliaCon to see the scores of fellow nerdlings that will undoubtedly blow my mind with all the creative, ingenious ways they have been working to make the world a better place.

## Valentin Churavy

I first started using Julia in 2014, I remember spending the winter of 2013 writing a multi-agent robotic simulator in Scala for neuro-evolutionary experiments. I think I had seen the "Why we created Julia" blog during that time and frustrated with the experience of writing numerical codes in Scala, I decided to use my next project as an opportunity to learn Julia. My first real projects was taking a Matlab code, written by a collaborator, that was to slow and translating it 1:1 to Julia. Since it was using explicit loops, I immediately got something like a 10x speedup, and further optimizations made it 100x faster. I was hooked. Later in this project I started experimenting with GPUs, and especially [`OpenCL.jl`](https://github.com/JuliaGPU/OpenCL.jl). The warm welcome I got from Jake B., when I submitted my first serious pull-request, drew me into the community and stayed with me as a reflection of what the Julia Community is. Over the years Julia became an ever greater part of my life, co-maintaining the [JuliaGPU](https://juliapu.org) and [JuliaHPC](https://github.com/JuliaHPC) ecosystem, contributing to Julia core, and organising [JuliaCon](https://juliacon.org) since 2017. As Elliot wrote, "Come for the speed, stay for the community" has certainly been true for me, and I have made a great many friends over the last years. Here's to another 10 years, and that Julia stays my favorite frontend to LLVM, and that there will be many [shenanigans](https://github.com/JuliaDebug/Cthulhu.jl) [left](https://github.com/EnzymeAD/Enzyme.jl) [to do](https://github.com/JuliaGPU/KernelAbstractions.jl).

## Jose Storopoli

I stumbled into Julia while trying to do a crazy data transformation in R that was taking forever. I was instantaneously hooked! The syntax is so easy, and it has also a "math" feel to it. You can use all your `ϵ` and `δ`, along with the statistician's favorites `α` and `β`.
Since then, I've become a contributor to the [`JuliaStats`](https://github.com/JuliaStats) and [`Turing`](https://github.com/TuringLang/) (Bayesian modeling) Julia's ecosystems. The community is great and very welcoming. I've made amazing friendships here, co-authored a [free open access and open source Julia Data Science book](https://juliadatascience.io) with Rik Huijzer and Lazaro Alonso. The book has been translated to Portuguese and Chinese by volunteers, that which I am grateful and humbled. Julia is taking big strides now, since its first appearance 10 years ago. I am really excited about its future and honored to be a part of it.

## Jacob Scott Zelko

In 2019, it was my opinion that extracting the signal from nigh infinite data was going to become imperative in the future. I grew very concerned not only about how to apply methods of high performance computing to data but also about the inequity such tooling would create - those with super computers could do cutting edge research and those without, how could they compete? I was researching a tool to invest in and came across Common Lisp, but saw it wasn't for me. Lisp seemed like my ideal tool and then I came across Julia. Not only was it designed for high performance, but also the syntax was friendly and the community was great. I made my first core contribution a few short months later. Since then, I co-created the fun animation package [Javis.jl](https://github.com/JuliaAnimators/Javis.jl) with my friend Ole Kröger, joined various Julia workgroups and use it daily. Today, we are acutely aware, delays can lead to lives lost. I use Julia in my health research to address and rapidly identify health disparities, deliver insight, and to perhaps assist in decisions to protect lives. I believe that Julia is _the_ tool to do this and I look forward to another 10 years.

## Matt Brzezinski

July 2019 I left my job at AWS and joined a small company Invenia as a software engineer. During my interview I first heard about the new programming language I would need to learn, Julia. Invenia had recently ported over their entire code base from Matlab to Julia, and was quickly becoming one of the foremost companies use Julia in a production environment. I spent my first week at Invenia porting various internal and external packages from Julia 0.7 to 1.0 and found it to be a simple and intuitive language to use coming from a Python background. My second week was spent in Baltimore meeting and chatting and learning with the community in Baltimore for JuliaCon 2019. I was hooked. Almost 3 years later I've found that Julia has been my go to language for nearly everything. The ease of use, speed and community keep bringing me back for more. I'm excited to see where it goes from here.

## Julian Samaroo

About 8 years ago, I was a student studying neuroscience in college, very interested in computational modeling. I had implemented some basic spiking neural network simulators in MATLAB, and ported them to JavaScript, but always found both languages lacking. Still, I persisted with JavaScript, until about 3 years later, when I first heard about Julia from somewhere on the interwebs. Out of boredom and a mild displeasure with JavaScript, I decided to give Julia a try. I will be honest; I had no shortage of problems using it! The errors were unintuitive, the syntax was strange, and it was *slow* (to compile, but what was the difference?). I kept using JavaScript for work, but slowly on the side I started getting more familiar with Julia, and tried using it for some of my simulations and side projects. Skipping to about 4 years ago, I got "nerd-sniped" by a certain Valentin Churavy to implement support for AMD GPUs in Julia, since I was so vocal about wanting to support a more open-source friendly GPU vendor. Over the next 2 years, I developed AMDGPUnative.jl (now AMDGPU.jl) and Dagger.jl in my free time, slowly gaining an appreciation for Julia, and attended my very first JuliaCon in 2019! Somewhat shortly afterwards, Valentin reached out from the JuliaLab and offered me an RSE position (which was an offer I could have only dreamed of at that point in life!), which I gladly accepted. Since then, I've been working full-time on AMDGPU.jl, Dagger.jl, BPFnative.jl, and Julia itself, and have been loving every moment of it. I don't think I could ever give up the wonderful ecosystem, language, and people that I've come to know and love over the last 5 years, and I look forward to many more wonderful years to come.

## Rik Huijzer
During my master thesis, I did some machine learning in Python but kept getting annoyed by object-oriented code bases. They seemed more complicated than was absolutely necessary, especially around testing, and I felt that classes where the cause for it. So, as a proper hacker, I tried to write all my Python code without classes to great discomfort of people who read it. A few months later, very naively, I tried the same thing at a C# job to even greater discomfort of the people who read it. Luckily, all my problems were solved when I read about the Julia language on some blog post. Julia doesn't have classes. Also, the language looked really well thought out, so I set out on a mission to not touch another language since that day somewhere in 2019. It has been a very interesting ride so far. I'm constantly amazed by how much can be learned from reading Julia code and discussions and getting feedback on pull requests. This is due to the solid foundation that the language provides and the great community that is building things with Julia. Thanks to these things, I'm hopeful that Julia will be the primary tool for research in industry and academia in 10 years.
I think we can do it in 9.

## Eric Davies

2011 was my first year at Invenia, where we were maintaining a fairly elaborate production system written in MATLAB 2007b. Python had begun to replace Perl in our helper scripts and web services, and several of us were keen to move to a language with a healthy community that made modern software development possible. My first experiments were disheartening, though; how could I expect a researcher to be happy moving from `A'*A` to `np.matmul(A.conj().T, A)`? 

In 2012 a coworker shared the Julia blog post with me. To my surprise, the first examples of Julia I encountered were concise, readable, highly performant, and even valid MATLAB code! This language was new and unstable but clearly aimed to fit our needs exactly, without expensive and closed-source license terms or buggy Neural Network Toolboxes. I became active on the mailing lists, watching for new developments and continuously evaluating its feature set against our needs. In 2014 Invenia sent two of us to the first JuliaCon and we have been present every year since, growing alongside each other. It was in 2014 that the first package groundwork was laid for our system to fully transition to Julia, which completed several years later. 

Those first years on the mailing lists set the tone for the community to come. Core developers were happy to explain how the language worked and the detailed and thoughtful reasoning behind design decisions. Every month brought new and exciting features (Keyword arguments! A package manager! Inline arrays of immutables!). Newcomers could quickly get help, collaborate, and contribute. While the community has grown immensely since the early days (it's much more challenging to bait Jeff Bezanson into fixing your pet compiler bug), this community attitude is alive and well, distributed through the hundreds of active community contributors.

## Alejandro Merchan

I heard about Julia for the first time probably around 2015. I was doing some GLMM analyses in R for my PhD in Entomology and just looking for as much information I could find. I found some book on Github authored by Douglas Bates that was unpublished and I wondered why. Pulling that thread brought me to some post where Doug said that he was leaving R and moving his programming to Julia. I checked, it was probably the 0.3 version and the language was so barebones that I was scared (not a computer scientist!). At that point I had gone from R in the terminal to RStudio and I was happy with that. However, I kept going back to the project from time to time and kept looking at the code in the GLM package, very surprised that it was written in Julia all the way and I could pretty much read it, unlike what had happened in R. Later, during my postdoc, I had a new project that required a lot of data, so I used it as an excuse to finally use Julia for real. Version 0.6 was out and I started learning the basics for data analysis in Julia. Juno was also available, which makes things easier for me too. And since then, I pretty much only use Julia for data analysis. At work I still have to use R, Python and SQL, but on my laptop I try to centralize everything in Julia and I really love the language and the community. I don't have many PR's, I did publish one small package that I needed and have a lot of personal packages for my work, plus plans to work on a couple more, I'm somewhat active on Discourse and Slack and in general try to stay engage. I hope this project continues growing and maturing.

## Johnny Chen

I remember it so clearly that it was during a deep learning summer school when for the first time I heard about the the word "Julia" two days after its 1.0 release. It was a lab where people don't see programming seriously and I was disappointed about MATLAB for quite a long time. The summer school was a bit boring to me so I took the entire 10 days there reading the Julialang and its ecosystem documentation. I can still rebuild the very memories that how excited I was when two months later I created a small [`repeat` patch PR](https://github.com/JuliaLang/julia/pull/29626) that receives a :+1: from Jeff Bezanson (although I immediately noticed that people do this for every new contributor :laughing:), and that how proud I was when two years later I accidentally fixed a 6-year-old performance issue in the [`CartesianIndices` step support feature PR](https://github.com/JuliaLang/julia/pull/37829) for which Tim holy sent an appreciation in the famous #appreciation slack channel. Those are all good memories I have in the julia community and I'm always thankful for growing together with Julia and for learning from the talented yet friendly people here.

## Jerry Ling

I was, like many people, moderately skeptical when I saw Julia's promise of "the best of both worlds" the first time; in fact, I remember walking away not particularly impressed the first time I tried Julia in 2018, largely due to latency (TTFT) issue with plotting. That soon change when I tried again near v1.0 release after hearing a PhD student (Katharine Hyatt) in UCSB physics was doing cool quantum stuff in Julia. Things moved fast after that: once you know the two-language problem, it's everywhere in physics. So many things are "free" in Julia, millions lines of C++/Python can be skipped because Julia is not slow, auto diff would have helped with numerous inverse problem in physics etc. Today, though not as proficient in compiler or typing system than many core devs in this post, I strive to bring better computing tools to physics, and I hope to witness a rapid adoption of Julia in the next decade.

## Alex Arslan

I first came across Julia at version 0.2, back in the days of the Julia Studio IDE and its bundled tutorials. At the time I was using SAS for work and didn't have much reason to use Julia for anything. However, shortly thereafter I got involved with online code golf challenges, which finally provided an excuse to use Julia for something. I quickly became known as "the guy who uses Julia" in that community, as it was otherwise exceedingly uncommon to see a solution posted in Julia. That community also introduced me to making open source contributions, something I had been completely unfamiliar with prior. After a couple of years as a casual Julia user, in 2015-2016 I finally started contributing to Julia and its packages, and got to interact with, meet, learn from, and befriend some absolutely wonderful people. In 2017 I left my job to work full time on Julia as the community manager, and since then I've continued to do releases and have been using Julia full time in one capacity or another. I even had the pleasure of getting to tag Julia v1.0.0 on stage at JuliaCon 2018 in London alongside Julia's creators, a real once-in-a-lifetime opportunity. Thank you to everyone who's made Julia what it is over these past 10 years, and a special thank you to the people instrumental in onboarding me to the community: Milan Bouchet-Valat, Andreas Noack, Tony Kelman, Stefan Karpinski, and Jiahao Chen; the people who made it possible for me to use Julia professionally for the past 5 years: Viral Shah, Curtis Vogt, and Jarrett Revels; and Jeff Bezanson for getting me hooked on Scheme.

## Cristóvão Sousa

Julia is the language I was longing for. And in the late summer of 2013, that "Why We Created Julia" was mind-blowing to me! I had been taught to program in C and C++ and later I learned some MATLAB too.  I always looked for performance and I'm the kind of person that prefers to waste more time optimizing code than wasting little time waiting for it to run. But on the other hand, I need to write math/scientific code and I like to do it in a high-level language. When starting the PhD in 2009, along with C++ I wanted to use an open-source higher-level language, so I opted for Python. However, the slowness was a bummer and I had to rely on workarounds like Cython. I was not happy, and I was greedy, always wondered "Why can't a better language, high-level but performant, be devised? It must be possible somehow!". While playing with PythonTEX in that summer of 2013, its documentation referred to some language by the name of "Julia". My first reaction was exactly "Oh no! Yet another high-level language like Python, Ruby, etc. Why... why?". Then I read its manifesto, and "WOW! YAY!". It ticked all the boxes, even the one-based indexing was a cherry on top! Eight years have gone by, I'm a very happy Julia user and I'm always excited and looking forward to all the new cool stuff coming from the excellent community.

## Jakob Nissen
Back in 2017, I needed to properly implement code for my PhD project. My naive "Python for everything" ideology bumped into hard reality, as I realized my implementation of a core component was 100 times slower than acceptable. I tried Numba, Cython and diving into deep Numpy lore, but no solution was satisfactory. With great resentment, I realized that for performance sensitive computing, there can be no such thing as a Python programmer: I could wrap my code in a Python cloak, but I would have to write all the hard stuff in C. A friend who had picked up Julia for theoretical physics taught me that my frustration was common in scientific computing, and had a name: "The two language problem". Even better, it had a solution: Julia.

Like most people, I was initially skeptical of the promises of Julia, and resisted getting dragged out of my Python comfort zone. But while I found Julia alien and had all kinds of superficial grievances, I was also curious and kept playing with it. After a few months, the relative elegance of performance of my Julia code was undeniable. As many others have experienced, learning Julia is somehow a slippery slope, and before I knew it, I learned about CI, good testing practice, and low-level computing. In 2020, I switched my work code to Julia, and have never looked back since.

## Gabriel Baraldi
I first saw julia in a blog post about S4TF and differential programming. The concept attracted my attention but went over my head completely and it being swift meant I wasn't very keen on trying it out. The post did mention a language called julia, and said that it looked like python and ran like C, and that attracted me. Like lots of people here I wrote prototype code in python and either had to struggle with making it performant or rewrite it in C++.

I had kept it on the backburner for a little while but when I saw Grant from 3b1b mention it I decided it was time to give it an actual go in a project, and doing that project I fell in love with the language, and with the language came the community and now I keep getting nerd sniped from every side thanks to the interesting things people do with julia. I now use it everyday and hope to help lots of people use it too :).

## Logan Kilpatrick
Back in 2018, I was lucky enough to join a team at NASA that was using Julia. I had the chance to work through the 0.6 to 1.0 transition. This led to me getting involved in open source and ultimately helping out on getting the community momentum behind Stack Overflow. After that, I was lucky enough to help lead Google Code-in for the Julia community in 2019 where we mentored 212 high school students. 

What has kept me involved in the Julia community for all these years is the opportunity to give back. There are so many amazing opportunities to do work that has a real impact and it keeps me motivated to continue helping!

## Mark Kittisopikul

I heard about Julia in 2012 as I was finishing graduate school research in San Diego. I read the “Why We Created Julia” post then, and thought this is exactly what I want. I was too busy to get involved then, but I kept tabs on it as it developed.

By early 2020, I saw the 1.0 release a couple years back and decided to start learning Julia, and I was immediately impressed. By March 2020, I submitted my [first pull request](https://github.com/JuliaLang/julia/pull/35048) to `JuliaLang/Julia` and soon discovered that Julia was a language that I could not only use but also help develop. As I started a new job, I needed a tool to help me quickly explore C APIs. I found Julia did that, but also outperformed other tools I was using in many tasks in terms of both development time and execution time. I could use [SIMD](https://github.com/eschnett/SIMD.jl), [call any C function I wanted](https://docs.julialang.org/en/v1/manual/calling-c-and-fortran-code/), and [solve complicated mathematical problems](https://sciml.ai/). Julia is the perfect language for scientific computing and beyond.

Along the way, I also engaged in the Julia community, which was very helpful and approachable. It is not uncommon to speak directly with one of the founders who signed the original “Why We Created Julia” post. I look forward to using Julia as rapidly grows and to helping to achieve the original vision put forth ten years ago.

## Qingyu Qu

By early 2020, I first knew about Julia from Roger’s post on Zhihu. With the first try of Julia, I just love the feeling of writing Julia code, similar with Python, MATLAB and Fortran, but easier and more elegant, what impressed me most is the amazing performance and friendly community!

Being inspired by [SciML](https://sciml.ai/), I decided to use Julia help with numerical methods in fractional order area. And here we are, we initiated [SciFracX project](https://github.com/SciFracX), aiming at making fractional order computing and modeling easier with Julia. And it turns out we chose the right path. The performance is awesome and amazing! Some packages gradually become the most useful packages in fractional order scientific computing.

It’s very nice to see Julia community is growing bigger, what will happen in next decade? Let us witness together;)

## Kirill Zubov 
The first time, I heard about Julia language, was in 2016, I was then studying for a master's degree at the department of Computational physics. One of my  professors by numerical methods said in a lecture something like “Julia is a new and interesting programming language, pay attention to it.” I said to myself - well, ok, I will know, but did not pay much attention. And already a couple of years later, in 2019, I learned about a new direction in computational science - solving differential equations using deep learning methods. I've thought it had great prospects and I would be very interested in doing it. I firmly decided to move in this direction. It so happened that this is what the [SciML](https://sciml.ai/) was actively doing. Well, then it started, first I participated in the Julia Season Of Contribution, then I was a mentor at Google Code-in and then participated in Google Summer of Code, where we started implementing [Physics-informed neural networks(PINNs)](https://nextjournal.com/kirill_zubov/physics-informed-neural-networks-pinns-solver-on-julia-gsoc-2020-final-report) at [NeuralPDE.jl](https://neuralpde.sciml.ai/stable/).
At first, I just liked the Julia language - syntax, simplicity, convenience, understandability, and sure, a great people and community, and after some time of use, learning, and immersion in details. I began to be more sure that Julia is the best way for all fresh numerical fields of science, where need to work with complex mathematical models in a symbolic and numeric way and combine it together with experimental data and new deep-learning methods, and high-speed calculations, so it is reasons why I guess that JuliaLang as the future of numerical computing.

## Michael F. Herbst

Similar to many others, I did not really take Julia seriously when I first heard about it in 2016. It just sounded too good to be true: A language that is both flexible and fast. However, having received enthusiastic comments from a number of different people independently, I was curious enough to give it a try in 2018. This turned out to be a revelation and the start into my ongoing Julia journey.

At my next scientific position, I was fortunately able to work with Julia full-time and develop what has now become the [density-functional toolkit (DFTK)](https://dftk.org). Our goal with DFTK was to produce a code base, which fosters collaboration between simulation scientists, mathematicians and computer scientists in the context of electronic-structure simulations. For this Julia turned out to be the right choice as it "magically" offers the flexibility and readability needed to develop novel models or algorithms as well as the low-level access to tweak performance. In this way Julia has become a vital ingredient not only to my research in this field. I am grateful for everyone who is part of this incredibly supportive and welcoming community and for everyone who has and will contribute to make Julia even better. I'm certainly looking forward to the next 10 years to come :).

## Paul Barrett

I heard about Julia in about 2016, but did not have the opportunity to seriously use it until late 2020 when I began developing software to analyze radio astronomy data, because I was not satisfied with the software supplied by the radio astronomy community. Because Julia has a REPL and performs JIT compilation, it is easy to define simple functions or models interactively. There is no need to create a specialized language and parser for those functions because they are implemented in C or FORTRAN for performance reasons. Julia solves the two language problem. This brings me to the development of Numpy and Scipy 25 years ago. As an astronomer and scientific programmer at the Space Telescope Science Institute, I was one of the early developers of Numpy and matplotlib, and early advocates for its use by the astronomical community. It is now the de facto language in astronomy. However, we were aware of the two language problem at the time, but did not have the time nor the resources to implement a new language. Knowing this limitation, I was prepared to adopt Scipy's successor, if and when it arrived. Julia is that successor. Like 25 years ago, I am now advocating for Julia to become the de facto language in astronomy.

## George Gkountouras

It all started with a need to simulate audio circuits. After a survey of various frameworks for solving differential equations in 2021, I settled on DiffEq, a 'killer app' of the Julia ecosystem. Incidentally, JuliaCon was around that time. I was aware of the language since early 2019, when a Julia implementation of that infamous PyTorch paper on Neural ODEs appeared.

Languages are about more than pointers and monads. The amiable community and robust package manager impressed more than bold claims about speed and readability. Of course, the benefits are real and substantial. 2 weeks of painful manual derivations reduced to 4 lines of code. Getting multiphysics simulation for free. The ease of SPICE combined with the power of a full programming language... if the programming language were also differentiable. ;)

If brevity is the soul of wit, then Julia is catnip for the soul. Here's to the next 10 years!

## Jeff Bezanson

We (I am comfortable here speaking for other long-term Julia maintainers) have always seen a programming language not just as a piece of code to drop on GitHub but as a continuous process and a commitment. In 2012, occasionally a prospective Julia user came to us with very understandable questions about the future of the project: what if you all decide to move on to something else in a year or two? Well, I believe I knew I would still be working on it 10 years later, but I did not know how quickly those years would go by, neatly filling the decade of my 30s as it happens. If we don't start writing the 25-year retrospective soon, it will sneak right up on us --- and I'm not sure even that will be enough time to achieve all of our goals. Fortunately I am having a lot of fun working with everybody.

## Tim Holy

I missed the original release of the now-famous blog post by about a month: I was "just" a scientist and not in the habit of reading programming blogs. However, in early 2012 it was becoming clear that my scientific needs were going to force me to give up on slow dynamic languages, though I had deep reluctance to abandon the efficiencies of interactive code development. A fortuitous search for "interactive command line C" introduced me, via the blog post, to an intriguing language called Julia. Little did I know that it was about to become a way of life for me. Helping make Julia better has led me to write perhaps more C code than I would care to admit (deep within Julia's internals), but the purpose and community it serves is its own reward.

What I find surprising is that the pace of progress never seems to slow. Three and a half years after the release of Julia 1.0 with consistent dedication to backwards compatibility, the Julia of today nevertheless feels like a different animal from the one we released in 2018. I can't wait to see what happens in the next 10 years!

## Kim Louisa Auth

I first heard of Julia around the time of the 1.0 release during my master’s degree. At the time I was confronted with a different programming language in almost every course. So, I didn’t take much notice, until I started my master thesis and was asked to “give Julia a try and decide if I want to keep going with it for my PhD work”. I gave it a try, quickly liked Unicode characters, the automatic-differentiation capabilities, and the package manager. Even more than any of the language features, I however appreciated the helpfulness and interest of my Julia using coworkers who patiently answered all my questions and, much more importantly, pointed me on the things of which I didn’t know that I would want to ask about (wait, I can set the number of BLAS threads and that gives my simulation a huge speed-up?! Why?). Along the way of turning from a beginner to a user to a contributor, I got used to following the Julia Slack and Discourse and got into the Julia community. Being from an engineering background, I was somewhat used to male dominated environments. When watching a JuliaCon 2018 video however, I was pretty stunned about *how* few women were sitting in the auditorium – and figured that I want to contribute to changing that. That’s how I became a member of [Julia Gender Inclusive](https://discourse.julialang.org/t/announcing-julia-gender-inclusive/63702) (which, as the name suggests, is not only about women!). I was amazed at meeting other women who shared my passion for programming, and it is great how appreciative the Julia community has been towards initiatives like this!
