# CliMA: A New Open-Source Climate Model Running on GPUs

Climate models are complex codes that simulate Earth's climate system
(atmosphere, ocean, land, ice). These models demand immense computing power and
present significant software engineering challenges, including managing massive
datasets, ensuring numerical stability, optimizing performance, and coupling
diverse components. The complexity and legacy nature of existing models hinder
their ability to fully utilize modern computing infrastructure (GPUs, machine
learning, etc.). The Climate Modeling Alliance is developing CliMA, a new
climate model built in Julia and designed from the outset to leverage GPU
acceleration and modern software engineering practices to overcome the
limitations of traditional climate models.

### `ClimaExplorer`: An Interactive Visualizer of Climate Model Outputs

Visualizing simulation output is crucial for both scientific understanding and
outreach. This project involves developing `ClimaExplorer`, an interactive
visualizer for the output of the CliMA Earth system model. `ClimaExplorer` will
leverage the [Makie](https://github.com/MakieOrg/Makie.jl) ecosystem and web
technologies, providing a user-friendly interface for exploring complex climate
data. This will enable researchers to more easily analyze and interpret
simulation results, accelerating scientific discovery. Furthermore, the
web-based component will facilitate broader dissemination of results to a wider
audience.

**Desired Skills:** Familiarity with front-end web development (HTML,
JavaScript, and CSS), Julia, and [Makie](https://github.com/MakieOrg/Makie.jl).

**Difficulty:** Medium

**Duration** 175 hours

**Expected Results:** `ClimaExplorer`, a new module for interactive
visualization of simulation output (with tests and documentation).

**Mentor:** [Gabriele Bozzola](https://github.com/sbozzolo)

**Contact:** Feel free to ask questions via [email](clima-software@caltech.edu)
or [Julia
Slack](https://join.slack.com/t/julialang/shared_invite/zt-2a5wdtotu-H52pQQTMDOa4NwsTSgQ_lQ)
(DM to Gabriele Bozzola).

_Interested in other aspects of climate modeling in Julia but not this
particular project? Get in touchâ€”we have many more projects!_
