---
layout: post
title:  Why Julia?
authors:
    - <a href="http://www.allthingshpc.org/Welcome.html">Viral Shah</a>
    - Jeff Bezanson
    - <a href="http://karpinski.org/">Stefan Karpinski</a>
    - <a href="http://www-math.mit.edu/~edelman/">Alan Edelman</a>
---

In a world where we have numerous languages for technical computing,
why do we need a fresh approach? There are a number of commercial ones
such as MATLAB, Mathematica, Maple, SAS, Stata, etc. There are a
number of open source languages such as R, Python+SciPy, Octave,
Scilab, etc. Just like most such projects, we started with julia to
scratch an itch.

The choices available require the programmer to choose between various
trade-offs. The best performance is typically only available if you
write your programs in C or Fortran, or if you effectively spend all
your time in code written in C or Fortran. Python is incredibly
versatile, has a rich general purpose library, and with SciPy,
provides a good array library. However, computation that is done
natively in python for numerical computing is several orders of
magnitude slower than C or Fortran. The same problem affects R for
statistical applications - Libraries are fast as they call C code, but
native R is slow. Matlab does have a JIT, but is still no replacement
for C, and it costs a *LOT* of money. We feel that in today's world,
a programmer can demand to have all the good stuff in one language.

Some of the features of Julia are:

1. Open source. The core of julia is licensed under the MIT license.
2. A very high level language: Syntax is similar to that of other
technical computing languages.
3. High performance: Julia's LLVM-based JIT compiler combined with the
language's design allow it to approach and often match the performance
of C/C++. Much of julia's standard library, and some compiler passes
are implemented in julia itself.
4. Programming with arrays: Vectorized code can be written just like
in other languages. However, it is not mandatory to write vectorized
code for performance.
5. Calling C/Fortran code: Julia provides a simple and straightforward
way to call C/Fortran code, with minimal boilerplate.
6. Dynamic: The language design centres around type inference and
multiple dispatch.
7. Multiple UIs: The compiler functionality is provided as a library,
so that multiple frontends can be written for different purposes. This
is demonstrated through the implementation of a command-line REPL, and
a web REPL.

We invite the reader to try it out julia and tell us what they think.
